[API-289] [API-290] [API-291] SQL documentation, code samples (#878)
hazelcast/hazelcast-nodejs-client: DOCUMENTATION.md

console.log(value);
```

## 8.7. SQL

The SQL service provided by Hazelcast Node.js client allows you to query data stored in `IMap` declaratively.

> **WARNING: The SQL feature is currently in beta. The compatibility between versions is not guaranteed. API might change between versions without notice. While in beta, SQL feature is tested against the same version of the IMDG, e.g 4.2.x
> client is tested against 4.2.x IMDG server.**

### Example: How to Query an IMap using SQL

This SQL query returns map entries whose values are more than 1:

```javascript
const map = await client.getMap('my-distributed-map');
await map.put('key1', 1);
await map.put('key2', 2);
await map.put('key3', 3);

const result = client.getSqlService().execute(`SELECT __key, this FROM my-distributed-map WHERE this > 1`);

> for await(const row of result){

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for await (const row of result) {
```

    console.log(row); // {__key: 'key3', this: 3} and {__key: 'key2', this: 2}
}
```

> ### Casting

Reviewer: We have a separate section for casting, I think it will be better if we move this to there

Author: move what?

Author: I think now I got it, move this section to 8.7.3

When comparing a column with a parameter, your parameter must be of a compatible type. Since Node.js client uses double
as default number type, to compare with an integer based column you can use long objects or casting.

The similar thing applies to other data types. You can cast string to every SQL type.

#### Using long

In the example below, age column is of type `INTEGER`. Since long objects are sent as `BIGINT`, there is no problem in the
comparison.

```javascript
const result = client.getSqlService().execute(
    'SELECT * FROM myMap WHERE age > ? AND age < ?',
    [long.fromNumber(13), long.fromNumber(18)]
);
```

#### Using casting

In the example below, age column is of type `INTEGER`. The default number type is `double` by default. Since we cast

> doubles as `BIGINT`, there is no problem in the comparison. Note that we can also cast to other types that are be

Reviewer 2: ... other types that are comparable ...

comparable with `INTEGER`.

```javascript
const result = client.getSqlService().execute(
    'SELECT * FROM myMap WHERE age > CAST(? AS BIGINT) AND age < CAST(? AS BIGINT)',
    [13, 18]
);
```

### 8.7.1. Querying IMap

The following subsections describe how you can access Hazelcast map objects and perform queries on them.

#### Names

The SQL service exposes `IMap` objects as tables in the predefined `partitioned` schema using exact names.
This schema is in the SQL service search path so that you can access the `IMap` objects with or without the schema name.

Schema and table names are case-sensitive; you can access the `employee` map, for example, as employee or `partitioned.employee`,
but not as `Employee`:
```sql
SELECT * FROM employee
SELECT * FROM partitioned.employee
```

> #### Field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Fields
```

The SQL service resolves fields accessible from the SQL automatically. The service reads the first local entry pair of
the `IMap` to construct the list of fields. If the `IMap` does not have local entries on the member where the query is
started, then the list of fields cannot be resolved, and an exception is thrown.

Field names are case-sensitive.

##### Key and Value Objects

An `IMap` entry consists of a key and a value. These are accessible through the `__key` and `this` aliases. The following
query returns the keys and values of all entries in a map:

```sql
SELECT __key, this FROM employee
```

##### Key and Value Fields

> You may also access the nested fields of a key or a value. The list of exposed fields depends on the serialization format, as described below:

Reviewer 2: ... fields of a key or value.

> * For [IdentifiedDataSerializable](#41-identifieddataserializable-serialization) objects, you can use public field name or getter names.

Reviewer 2: I think there should be a new line before this bulleted list item (to render it properly).

  See [IMDG docs](https://docs.hazelcast.com/imdg/4.2/sql/querying-imap.html#key-and-value-fields) for more information.

> * For [Portable](#42-portable-serialization) objects, the fields that are written with `PortableWriter` methods are exposed using their exact names.

Reviewer 2: ... objects, the fields written with ...

        this.age = age;
        this.name = name;
        this.factoryId = 321;
        this.classId = 1;
    }

    readPortable(reader) {
        this.age = reader.readInt('age');
        this.name = reader.readString('name');
    }

    writePortable(writer) {
        writer.writeInt('age', this.age);
        writer.writeString('name', this.name);
    }
}
```

The SQL service can access the following fields:

|  Name  |  Type     |
|--------|-----------|
|  name  |  VARCHAR  |
|  age   |  INTEGER  |

Together with the key and value objects, you may query the following fields from `IMap<number, Employee>`:

```sql
SELECT __key, this, name, age FROM employee
```

If both the key and value have fields with the same name, then the field of the value is exposed.

##### "SELECT *" Queries

You may use the `SELECT * FROM <table>` syntax to get all the table fields.

The `__key` and `this` fields are returned by the `SELECT *` queries if they do not have nested fields. For `IMap<number, Employee>`,
the following query does not return the `this` field, because the value has nested fields `name` and `age`:

```sql
-- Returns __key, name, age
SELECT * FROM employee
```

> ### 8.7.2. Data types

Reviewer: Let's remove the Java types and mention of Java below

> ### 8.7.2. Data types

Reviewer 2: Data Types

| **DECIMAL**                  | `java.math.BigDecimal`     | `string`                                   |
| **REAL**                     | `java.lang.Float`          | `number`                                   |
| **DOUBLE**                   | `java.lang.Double`         | `number`                                   |
| **DATE**                     | `java.time.LocalDate`      | `HzLocalDate`                              |
| **TIME**                     | `java.time.LocalTime`      | `HzLocalTime`                              |
| **TIMESTAMP**                | `java.time.LocalDateTime`  | `HzLocalDateTime`                          |
| **TIMESTAMP_WITH_TIME_ZONE** | `java.time.OffsetDateTime` | `HzOffsetDateTime`                         |
| **OBJECT**                   | Any class(`Object`)        | Any class                                  |
| **NULL**                     | `Void`                     | `null`                                     |

### 8.7.3. Casting

You may need to use casting when sending parameters for certain types. In general, you should try to send a parameter
that has same data type with the related column.

> #### How to cast

Reviewer 2: How to Cast

Casting syntax: `CAST(? AS TYPE)`

Example casting:

```sql
SELECT * FROM someMap WHERE this = CAST(? AS INTEGER)
```

> 

Reviewer: unnecessary newlines

> #### Important notes about comparison and casting

Reviewer 2: Important Notes About Comparison and Casting

> 

Reviewer: unnecessary newline

> * Note that default number type in Node.js client is double by default. This means you need to cast when you are dealing with

Reviewer 2: Note that the default number type in Node.js client is double. This ...

const result = client.getSqlService().execute(`SELECT __key, this FROM my-distributed-map WHERE this > 1`);

for await (const row of result){
    console.log(row); // {__key: 'key3', this: 3} and {__key: 'key2', this: 2}
}
```

### 8.7.1. Querying IMap

The following subsections describe how you can access Hazelcast map objects and perform queries on them.

#### Names

The SQL service exposes `IMap` objects as tables in the predefined `partitioned` schema using exact names.
This schema is in the SQL service search path so that you can access the `IMap` objects with or without the schema name.

Schema and table names are case-sensitive; you can access the `employee` map, for example, as employee or `partitioned.employee`,
but not as `Employee`:
```sql
SELECT * FROM employee
SELECT * FROM partitioned.employee
```

#### Fields

The SQL service resolves fields accessible from the SQL automatically. The service reads the first local entry pair of
the `IMap` to construct the list of fields. If the `IMap` does not have local entries on the member where the query is
started, then the list of fields cannot be resolved, and an exception is thrown.

Field names are case-sensitive.

> 

Reviewer: unnecessary newline

```sql
-- Returns __key, name, age
SELECT * FROM employee
```

### 8.7.2. Data Types

The SQL service supports a set of SQL data types. The
table below shows SQL datatype, and corresponding Javascript types:

| Column Type                   Javascript           |
|------------------------------|---------------------|
| **VARCHAR**                  | `string`            |
| **BOOLEAN**                  | `boolean`           |
| **TINYINT**                  | `number`            |
| **SMALLINT**                 | `number`            |
| **INTEGER**                  | `number`            |
| **BIGINT**                   | `long`              |
| **DECIMAL**                  | `string`            |
| **REAL**                     | `number`            |
| **DOUBLE**                   | `number`            |
| **DATE**                     | `string`            |
| **TIME**                     | `string`            |
| **TIMESTAMP**                | `string`            |
| **TIMESTAMP_WITH_TIME_ZONE** | `string`            |
| **OBJECT**                   | Any class           |
| **NULL**                     | `null`              |

#### Date String Format

> Date SQL type is sent and received as strings. The string format is `yyyy-mm-dd`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL `DATE` type is sent and received as a string with the `yyyy-mm-dd` format.
```

#### Time String Format

> Time SQL type is sent and received as strings. The string format is `HH:mm:ss.SSS` where `SSS` represents nano seconds and can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL `TIME` type is sent and received as string  with the `HH:mm:ss.SSS` format where `SSS` represents nanoseconds and can
```

Reviewer: similar thing can be applied to other date types

be at most 9 digits long.

#### Timestamp String Format

Timestamp SQL type is sent and received as strings. The string format is `yyyy-mm-dd(T|t)HH:mm:ss.SSS` which is the combination of
Date and Time strings. There must be a `T` letter in between which can be in any case.

#### Timestamp with Timezone String Format

Timestamp SQL type is sent and received as strings. The string format is `yyyy-mm-dd(T|t)HH:mm:ss.SSS{timezoneString}` which is the combination of
Timestamp string, timezone string. The offset string is can be one of `Z`, `+hh:mm` or `-hh:mm` where `hh` represents hour-in-day, and `mm` represents minutes-in-hour.

### 8.7.3. Casting

You may need to use casting when sending parameters for certain types. In general, you should try to send a parameter
that has same data type with the related column.

#### How to Cast

Casting syntax: `CAST(? AS TYPE)`

Example casting:

```sql
SELECT * FROM someMap WHERE this = CAST(? AS INTEGER)
```

#### Casting Between Types

When comparing a column with a parameter, your parameter must be of a compatible type. Since Node.js client uses double

> as default number type, to compare with an integer based column you can use long objects or casting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as default number type, to compare with an integer based column you can use Long objects or casting.
```

```sql
-- Returns __key, name, age
SELECT * FROM employee
```

### 8.7.2. Data Types

The SQL service supports a set of SQL data types. The
table below shows SQL datatype, and corresponding Javascript types:

| Column Type                  | Javascript          |
|------------------------------|---------------------|
| **VARCHAR**                  | `string`            |
| **BOOLEAN**                  | `boolean`           |
| **TINYINT**                  | `number`            |
| **SMALLINT**                 | `number`            |
| **INTEGER**                  | `number`            |
| **BIGINT**                   | `long`              |
| **DECIMAL**                  | `string`            |
| **REAL**                     | `number`            |
| **DOUBLE**                   | `number`            |
| **DATE**                     | `string`            |
| **TIME**                     | `string`            |
| **TIMESTAMP**                | `string`            |
| **TIMESTAMP_WITH_TIME_ZONE** | `string`            |
| **OBJECT**                   | Any class           |
| **NULL**                     | `null`              |

#### Decimal String Format

> Decimal SQL type is sent and received as strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DECIMAL` SQL type is sent and received as strings.
```
